.\"===========================================================================
.\" rand
.\" Copyright (C) 1998-2009 Erik Greenwald <erik@smluc.org>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"===========================================================================
.\" rand.1 man page for rand
.\" http://math.missouristate.edu/~erik/software.php?id=7
.\" $Id: rand.1,v 1.7 2009/08/31 17:40:38 erik Exp $
.\"===========================================================================
.Dd December 11, 1998
.Dt RAND 1
.\"===========================================================================
.Sh NAME
.Nm rand
.Nd randomize the order of a stream
.\"===========================================================================
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl lwvh
.Op Fl f Cm <input file>
.Op Fl o Cm <output file>
.Op Fl -help
.Op Fl -version
.\"===========================================================================
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
has 2 major modes of operation.
The first is as a pipe.
The second is to act on a specified file.
There are 2 minor modes of operation, the data can be randomized by line or word.
.Pp
As a pipe,
.Nm
collects the stream until it terminates, then displays the randomized results of this completed stream.
If the stream is the result of several operations, then the stream as a whole is randomized.
.Pp
When operating on a file,
.Nm
will read the input from a single given file, and display the results to stdout.
.Pp
The two command line parameters control if the randomization is per line or word.
The default behavior is to randomize by line.
.Nm
.B -w
will randomize by word, and return one word on every line.
A word in this sense is any string delimited by a whitespace.
Tabs, spaces, and newlines are ignored.
.Pp
.\"===========================================================================
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width
.It Op Fl l
Line shuffle
.It Op Fl w
Word shuffle
.It Op Fl c
Character shuffle
.It Op Fl v, -version
Show version and exit.
.It Op Fl h, -help
Show help and exit.
.It Op Fl f Cm <file>
Read from <file> instead of stdin.
.It Op Fl Cm <file>
Write to <file> instead of stdout.
.El
.\"===========================================================================
.Sh EXAMPLES
play `find -name *.wav |
.Nm
`
.br
.Nm
-w -f COPYING -o whatever
.br
.Nm
-l -f history.test -o test.1
.br
/bin/ls |
.Nm
-w
.\"===========================================================================
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Nm
returns EXIT_SUCCESS on success or EXIT_FAILURE on failure.
The only cases where EXIT_FAILURE may be returned are
.Bl -bullet
.It
\-f file can not be read.
.It
\-o file cannot be written to.
.It
An unknown option is presented (in which case, usage is also printed)
.El
.\"===========================================================================
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sort 1 ,
.Xr rand 3
.\"===========================================================================
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was created in October of 1998 when
.An Erik Greenwald
got tired of hacking things to shuffle stuff.
.\"===========================================================================
.Sh BUGS
.Nm
has no known bugs.
Please report any to
.An <erik@smluc.org>
.\"===========================================================================
.Sh AUTHOR
.An Erik Greenwald <erik@smluc.org> <erik@math.missouristate.edu>
